Recompose the security overview and built-in authentication content to diataxis doc templates (#30422)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-identity-providers-concept.adoc

////
This document is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id="security-identity-providers-concept"]
= Identity providers
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security
In the Quarkus Security framework, identity providers play a key role in authentication and authorization, providing services for storing and verifying user identities.

> The JPA `IdentityProvider` creates a `SecurityIdentity` instance, which is used during user authentication to verify and authorize access requests making your Quarkus application secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JPA `IdentityProvider` creates a `SecurityIdentity` instance used during user authentication to verify and authorize access requests, making your Quarkus application secure.
```

[[identity-providers]]

`IdentityProvider` converts the authentication credentials provided by `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` to a `SecurityIdentity` instance.

Some extensions, for example, `OIDC`, `OAuth2`, and `SmallRye JWT` have inline `IdentityProvider` implementations specific to the supported authentication flow.
For example, `quarkus-oidc` uses its own `IdentityProvider` to convert a token to a `SecurityIdentity` instance.

If you use Basic or form-based authentication then you must add an `IdentityProvider` instance that can convert a username and password to a `SecurityIdentity` instance.

> To get started with security in Quarkus, we recommend that you first combine the Quarkus built-in Basic HTTP authentication with the JPA identity provider to enable role-based access control (RBAC).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started with security in Quarkus, we recommend combining the Quarkus built-in Basic HTTP authentication with the JPA identity provider to enable role-based access control (RBAC).
```
